
Pomeranian (dog)
Pomeranian
A three year old Pomeranian female dog.
Other names	Deutscher Spitz; Zwergspitz; Pom; Zwers
Common nicknames	Pompom, Pom, Tumbleweed
Origin	Pomerania (modern-day Poland & Germany)
Traits
Life span	12-16 years
Classification / standards
FCI	Group 5 Spitz and Primitive dogs, Section 4 European Spitz #97e	standard
AKC	Toy	standard
ANKC	Group 1 (Toys)	standard
CKC	Group 5 (Toys)	standard
KC (UK)	Toy	standard
NZKC	Toy	standard
UKC	Companion Breeds	standard
Domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris)
The Pomeranian (often known as a Pom) is a breed of dog of the Spitz type that is named for the Pomerania region in north-west Poland and north-east Germany in Central Europe. Classed as a toy dog breed because of its small size, the Pomeranian is descended from the larger Spitz-type dogs, specifically the German Spitz. It has been determined by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale to be part of the German Spitz breed; and in many countries, they are known as the Zwergspitz ("Dwarf-Spitz").

The breed has been made popular by a number of royal owners since the 18th century. Queen Victoria owned a particularly small Pomeranian and consequently, the smaller variety became universally popular. During Queen Victoria's lifetime alone, the size of the breed had decreased by half. Overall, the Pomeranian is a sturdy, healthy dog. The most common health issues are luxating patella and tracheal collapse. More rarely, the breed can have Alopecia X, a skin condition colloquially known as "black skin disease". This is a genetic disease which causes the dog's skin to turn black and lose all or most of its hair.[1] As of 2013, in terms of registration figures, since at least 1998, the breed has ranked among the top fifty most popular breeds in the US, and the current fashion for small dogs has increased their popularity worldwide.

Appearance

Cream-colored Pomeranian

Orange sable Pomeranian

Tri-colored Pomeranian
Pomeranians are small dogs weighing 1.9–3.5 kilograms (4.2–7.7 lb) and standing 5.0–11 inches (13–28 cm) high at the withers.[2] They are compact but sturdy dogs with an abundant textured coat with a highly plumed tail set high and flat.[3] The top coat forms a ruff of fur on the neck, which Poms are well known for, and they also have a fringe of feathery hair on the hindquarters.[4]

The earliest examples of the breed were white or occasionally brown or black. Queen Victoria adopted a small red Pomeranian in 1888, which caused that color to become fashionable by the end of the 19th century.[5] In modern times, the Pomeranian comes in the widest variety of colors of any dog breed, including white, black, brown, red, orange, cream, blue, sable, black and tan, brown and tan, spotted, brindle, and parti, plus combinations of those colors.[6] The most common colors are orange, black, or cream/white.[3]

The merle Pomeranian is a recent color developed by breeders. It is a combination of a solid base color with lighter blue/grey patch which gives a mottled effect. The most common base colors for the effect are red/brown or black, although it can also appear with other colors. Combinations such as brindle merle or liver merle are not accepted in the breed standard. In addition, the eye, nose and paw pad are marshmallow color, changing parts of the eye to blue and the color on the nose and paw pads to become mottled pink and black.[7]

Pomeranians have a thick, double coat. While grooming is not difficult, breeders recommend that it be done daily to maintain the quality of the coat and because of its thickness and the constant shedding, with trimming every 1–2 months. The outer coat is long, straight, and harsh in texture while the undercoat is soft, thick and short. The coat knots and tangles easily, particularly when the undercoat is being shed, which happens twice a year.[8]

Behavior

A toy Spaniel, a dwarf Spitz and a Maltese next to a basket (1855) by Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Wegener [de].
Pomeranians are typically friendly, playful and lively; but they can be aggressive with other dogs to try to prove themselves.[9][10] Pomeranians are alert and aware of changes in their environment, and barking at new stimuli can develop into a habit of barking excessively in any situation. They are somewhat defensive of their territory and thus may bark when they hear outside noises.[11] Pomeranians are intelligent, respond well to training, and can be very successful in getting what they want from their owners.[12] They are extroverted and enjoy being the center of attention, but they can become dominant if not well trained and socialized.[12] The use of toys can be an effective tool in training Pomeranians to spend time alone.

Health
The life expectancy of a Pomeranian is 12 to 16 years.[13][better source needed] A well-bred dog on a good diet with appropriate exercise will have few health problems; and, if kept trim and fit, a Pomeranian is a sturdy dog.[14] The breed does have similar health issues to many dog breeds, although some issues such as hip dysplasia are uncommon because of the Pomeranian's lightweight build.[15] Some health issues can develop as a result of lack of attention to grooming and teeth-, ear-, and eye-cleaning. With routine care, these problems can be avoided.[16] They are prone to early tooth loss, and dry food is recommended.[17] Poms are one of the breeds with the smallest average litter size, with various sources giving numbers of between 1.9 and 2.7 puppies per litter.[18]

Common problems

A white Pomeranian
Merle colored dogs may have mild to severe deafness, increased intraocular pressure, ametropia, microphthalmia, and colobomas. Merle dogs born from parents who are also both merles may additionally have abnormalities of the skeletal, cardiac and reproductive systems.[19]

Luxating patella is another health issue in the Pomeranian breed.[15] It occurs when, through either malformation or trauma, the ridges forming the patellar groove in the knee are not prominent and are too shallow to allow the patella to properly sit securely. This can cause the patella to "luxate" (jump out of the groove) sideways which will cause the leg to lock up with the foot off the ground.[20] While the muscles are contracted the patella cannot return to the correct position. The initial pain is caused by the knee cap sliding across the ridges of the femur. Once out of position, the dog does not feel any pain caused by the slipped disc.[20]

Tracheal collapse is caused by a weakening of the tracheal rings in the windpipe. It occurs when the rings that normally hold the shape of the windpipe collapse, closing the airway. The symptoms of a collapse include a honking cough that can sound similar to a goose honk, an intolerance to exercise, fainting spells and a cough that is worsened by hot weather, exercise and excitement.[21] The tendency for episodes of tracheal collapse typically increases in frequency and severity as the dog ages.


Full-grown Pomeranian
In Pomeranians, a condition often called "black skin disease" occurs which is a combination of alopecia (hair loss) and hyperpigmentation (a darkening of the skin).[22] Other names for this condition include woolly coat, coat funk, pseudo-Cushing's disease, or severe hair loss syndrome. This condition affects male Pomeranians more than females, and may be inherited.[1] Although most affected dogs show signs following puberty, it can occur at any age. Other conditions can mimic this condition including Cushing's syndrome, hypothyroidism, chronic skin infections, and reproductive hormone disorders.[1]

Another common disorder in male Pomeranians is cryptorchidism.[23] This is when either one or both of the testicles do not descend into the scrotum.[23] It is treated through surgical removal of the retained testicle.[23]

Exercise
The Pomeranian is a small but energetic breed of dog. Although Pomeranians benefit from frequent attention, they need relatively little exercise: it is recommended to take them on several daily walks and let them run around an enclosed space.[24]


A Pomeranian dog crossed with an unidentified dog type
History
Origins

A miniature Pomeranian from 1915
The forerunners of today's Pomeranian breed were large working dogs from the Arctic regions. These dogs are commonly known as the Wolfspitz or Spitz type, which is German for "sharp point" which was the term originally used by Count Eberhard zu Sayn in the 16th century as a reference to the features of the dog's nose and muzzle. The Pomeranian is considered to be descended from the German Spitz.[25]

The breed is thought to have acquired its name by association with the area known as Pomerania which is located in northern Poland and Germany along the Baltic Sea. Although not the origin of the breed, this area is credited with the breeding which led to the original Pomeranian type of dog. Proper documentation was lacking until the breed's introduction into the United Kingdom.[25]

An early modern recorded reference to the Pomeranian breed is from 2 November 1764, in a diary entry in James Boswell's Boswell on the Grand Tour: Germany and Switzerland. "The Frenchman had a Pomeranian dog named Pomer whom he was mighty fond of."[26] The offspring of a Pomeranian and a wolf bred by an animal merchant from London is discussed in Thomas Pennant's A Tour in Scotland from 1769.[27]

Two members of the British Royal Family influenced the evolution of the breed. In 1767, Queen Charlotte, Queen-consort of King George III of England, brought two Pomeranians to England.



Queen Victoria, Queen Charlotte's granddaughter, was also an enthusiast and established a large breeding kennel. One of her favoured dogs was a comparatively small red sable Pomeranian which she possibly named "Windsor's Marco" and was reported to weigh only 12 lb (5.4 kg). When she first exhibited Marco in 1891, it caused the smaller-type Pomeranian to become immediately popular and breeders began selecting only the smaller specimens for breeding. During her lifetime, the size of the Pomeranian breed was reported to have decreased by 50%.[25] Queen Victoria worked to improve and promote the Pomeranian breed by importing smaller Pomeranians[28] of different colors from various European countries to add to her breeding program.[29] Royal owners during this period also included Joséphine de Beauharnais, the wife of Napoleon I of France, and King George IV of England.

The first breed club was set up in England in 1891, and the first breed standard was written shortly afterwards.[30] The first member of the breed was registered in America to the American Kennel Club in 1898, and it was recognized in 1900.[25]

In 1912, two Pomeranians were among only three dogs to survive the sinking of RMS Titanic. A Pomeranian called "Lady", owned by Miss Margaret Hays, escaped with her owner in lifeboat number seven, while Elizabeth Barrett Rothschild took her pet to safety with her in lifeboat number six.[31]

Glen Rose Flashaway won the Toy Group at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 1926, the first Pomeranian to win a group at Westminster.[25] It would take until 1988 for the first Pomeranian, "Great Elms Prince Charming II", to win the Best in Show prize from the Westminster Kennel Club.[32]

In the standard published in 1998, the Pomeranian is included in the German Spitz standard, along with the Keeshond, by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale.[33] According to the standard "Spitz breeds are captivating" and have a "unique characteristic, cheeky appearance."[33]

Popularity

Red Sable Pomeranian
The Pomeranian has been among the more popular dog breeds in the United States, featuring consistently in the top 20 of registered AKC dog breeds since at least 1998, when it was ranked #10; the breed was #17 in the 2011 rankings, dropping two spots from the previous year.[34] In 2012 and 2013 it remained in the top twenty and was ranked at #19.[35] In 2015, the breed fell to #21, falling further to #22 in both 2016 and 2017.[36]

It is not listed in the top 20 breeds in the UK in either 2007 or 2008.[37] In Australia their popularity has declined since 1986, with a peak of 1,128 Pomeranians registered with the Australian National Kennel Council in 1987; only 577 were registered in 2008. However, this is an increase from 2004, when only 491 dogs were registered.[38]

It is more popular in American cities in 2008, ranking joint tenth (with American Bulldog) in Detroit[39] and Orlando,[40] ninth in Los Angeles,[41] a joint seventh in Seattle (again, with the American Bulldog),[42] but third in Honolulu, only bested by the Labrador Retriever and the German Shepherd.[39]
About the Pomeranian
​The Pomeranian combines a tiny body (no more than seven pounds) and a commanding big-dog demeanor. The abundant double coat, with its frill extending over the chest and shoulders, comes in almost two dozen colors, and various patterns and markings, but is most commonly seen in orange or red.

Alert and intelligent, Pomeranians are easily trained and make fine watchdogs and perky pets for families with children old enough to know the difference between a toy dog and a toy. Poms are active but can be exercised with indoor play and short walks, so they are content in both the city and suburbs. They will master tricks and games with ease, though their favorite activity is providing laughs and companionship to their special human.
Pomeranians are the tiniest of the Spitz, or Nordic, breeds, but they have the courage of much bigger dogs. A perennially popular breed, the Pom weighs less than 7 pounds, but you won’t often find him in a puppy purse. That’s because Pomeranians think big. They know they have four feet and prefer to use them, just as larger dogs would.

Everything about the Pomeranian is bright: his eyes, his temperament, and his intelligence. Though he’s very fond of his family and delighted to get some lap time, he’s also a busy little guy. You’re more likely to find him trotting around your house on an important mission than snoozing on the sofa.

The Pom’s activity level makes him an ideal pet for someone who wants a small dog with the personality traits of the full-size sled and herding dogs from which this breed originates. Because he’s tiny, he can probably get enough exercise indoors, but he’s happiest when he gets to go on long walks, chase leaves, and play with other small dogs. He is athletic and frequently participates in dog sports such as agility, freestyle, obedience, rally, and tracking. Because of his diminutive size, he is suited to life in an apartment, but he is just as at home on a ranch or estate. However, he’s far too tiny to live outdoors. He needs to live inside with his family.

Pomeranians have a profuse double coat that needs regular brushing but are otherwise easy to care for. And, make no mistake, Poms bark. It may not be deafening, but it can be annoying and difficult to stop, even with training. As with many small dogs, Pomeranians may be harder to housetrain.

Ask your breeder about any behavior or health problems in dogs related to your prospective puppy. If she says there aren’t any, run. She should provide you with written documentation from the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA) that the parents of the puppy had normal hips, elbows, and knees, as well as from the Canine Eye Registry Foundation (CERF), certifying that they were free of vision problems.

A Pomeranian can go to his new home at 8 to 10 weeks of age, but some breeders like to keep pups until they are 12 to 14 weeks old to make sure they are mature enough to go to their new homes and to see which ones will shake out as show prospects.
Pomeranians are little dogs with “big dog” personalities. While lively, friendly and fun, they can be slightly territorial. They grow very attached to their owners and can develop a protectiveness that makes them suspicious of strangers. This not only makes for a loyal, tried-and-true companion, it makes for a superb watchdog. Pomeranians, though small, can really deliver on the barks when a stranger approaches the house.

In spite of this protectiveness, Pomeranians are not too clingy or codependent. And they’ll get along with every member of the family, including other pets, as long as they’re introduced properly.

Intelligent, busy and curious, they have a lovable independence. But they crave your attention and playtime, sometimes responding by standing on their hind legs and barking happily.
Pomeranians can sometimes be stubborn and willful, and they can easily dominate a weak-willed owner. A firm but friendly hand is needed day-to-day, especially when it comes to their barking. Pomeranians love to bark and bark and bark, sometimes for arbitrary reasons. If taught at an early age to limit the noise, they will.

Always keep Poms on a leash. Like other proud and small breeds, they are blissfully unaware of their size. They have the tendency to “take on” larger dogs, so always keep them close and protect them from conflict.

Pomeranians can shed quite a bit and need daily brushing to prevent tangling. Check their ears and ears regularly, and make sure they get scheduled visits to the dentist—Pomeranians’ teeth tend to gather tartar easily.
They are very happy living in apartments as long as they get regular exercise and human interaction.

A healthy Pomeranian can live as long as 15 years. Common health issues include eye problems, dislocated kneecaps, tooth loss and molting.
Descended from the Spitz family—specifically the sled dogs of Lapland and Iceland—Pomeranians were originally big, sturdy herders of sheep. Over time, they were bred down to a smaller size, becoming cherished pets of Marie Antoinette, Mozart and (famously) Queen Victoria, whose preference for small Pomeranians created a worldwide demand. During the late 1800s they came to the U.S., and the American Pomeranian Club held its first show in 1911. Ever since, their good temper and small size have made them an enduring favorite in the U.S.
The Pomeranian is a true "toy" dog, with an ideal height of eight to 11 inches and weight of only three to seven pounds (one to three kilograms).

They are often at mature size by seven to 10 months of age.

Pomeranians are easily recognized by their luxuriant fluffy double coat and foxy face with alert, prick ears. The body shape is fairly square, and the fluffy tail curls up and over the back. A thick ruff around the neck completes the picture of a dog that could handle the snows of northern Germany. The head is somewhat rounded with a distinct muzzle.

Pomeranians come in a wonderful array of colors. A rich red is most commonly associated with the breed, but everything from black to white to sable and shades in between are acceptable, even chocolate.

Personality:
Pomeranians are generally perky, friendly little dogs. They do not seem to realize they are small in stature and will occasionally tackle large dogs or at least verbally threaten them!

These are active little dogs that do need daily exercise, even if it is just a walk around the block. They are quite intelligent and do well in obedience competitions despite a small independent streak. As they age, they are more amenable to being truly lap dogs.

Pomeranians are often good alert and alarm dogs and can be prone to excessive barking. They tend to be good with children, but children need to be cautioned that these are small dogs and not as sturdy as the larger breeds.

Living With:
Pomeranians are usually easy to keep, although some are finicky eaters. They do not have a tendency toward obesity, probably because of their active nature. The double coat does require some regular grooming attention once or twice weekly, with daily sessions during shedding season.

Despite being small, Pomeranians do need regular exercise and thrive on training. They are very intelligent and enjoy learning tricks and performing. Poms generally get along well with other pets, but caution should be used mixing any toy breed with large breeds that might injure a toy dog accidentally. If raised with children they do quite well; if not, they may be reserved. Children need to be reminded that these smaller dogs may not be as sturdy as larger dogs, and interactions should be supervised.

Poms are excellent watchdogs with their alert attitude and their tendency to bark. They make very good companions for elderly folks because of their alertness and their small size.

History:
The Pomeranian is considered to be a miniaturized Spitz-type dog. Germany, specifically Pomerania in the 1800s, seems to be the site of the first breeding programs, although these dogs were quite large. Queen Victoria became enamored of the breed; from her dogs, the size was bred down even further to the toy dog we recognize today.

Certainly the German spitz dogs must be ancestors of these charmers. Dogs were then chosen for smaller size and for the bright colors we see today instead of the standard gray or white spitz coloring. From the start, "poms," as they are often referred to, have been companion dogs with a little bit of watchdog duty worked in.